\documentclass[problem]{mcs}

\begin{pcomments}
  \pcomment{CP_surprise_quiz_next_week}
  \pcomment{from: S09.cp1t}
\end{pcomments}

\pkeywords{
  paradox
  surprise
  induction
  contradiction
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Problem starts here
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\begin{problem}
Albert announces to his class that he plans to surprise them with a
quiz sometime next week.

His students first wonder if the quiz could be on Friday of next week.
They reason that it can't: if Albert didn't give the quiz
\emph{before} Friday, then by midnight Thursday, they would know the
quiz had to be on Friday, and so the quiz wouldn't be a surprise any
more.

Next the students wonder whether Albert could give the surprise quiz
Thursday.  They observe that if the quiz wasn't given \emph{before}
Thursday, it would have to be given \emph{on} the Thursday, since they
already know it can't be given on Friday.  But having figured that
out, it wouldn't be a surprise if the quiz was on Thursday either.
Similarly, the students reason that the quiz can't be on Wednesday,
Tuesday, or Monday.  Namely, it's impossible for Albert to give a
surprise quiz next week.  All the students now relax, having concluded
that Albert must have been bluffing.  And since no one expects the
quiz, that's why, when Albert gives it on Tuesday next week, it really
is a surprise!

What, if anything, do you think is wrong with the students' reasoning?

\begin{staffnotes}
Students sometimes get caught up in elaborate answers to this problem,
invoking probabilistic reasoning, for example, to explain something
about ``surprise.''  Gently warn them off working too hard on this
only to be disappointed by its unanswerability.

Other students simple deny the argument that the quiz can't be a
surprise on Thursday---for unclear reasons of course, but something
like the claim that ``On Thursday before class, you don't know whether
the quiz will be on Thursday or Friday, so you'll be surprised if it
happens Thursday.''  It can help to go back to the argument that the
quiz can't be a surprise on Friday and ask whether or not they agree
with that.
\end{staffnotes}

\begin{solution}
The basic problem is that ``surprise'' is not a mathematical concept,
nor is there any generally accepted way to give it a mathematical
definition.  The ``proof'' above assumes some plausible axioms about
surprise, without defining it.  The paradox is that these axioms are
inconsistent.  But that's \emph{no surprise}: mathematically speaking,
we don't know what we're talking about.

Surprise is clearly related to what you know and don't know, and just
explaining what ``knowing'' means is an important, but controversial
and tricky problem.  For example, is it possible to ``know'' something
that isn't true?  Do you necessarily know that you know something?  These
questions take on practical importance in Computer Science, for
example in determining the limitations of distributed communication
protocols~\cite{Fagin95}.

Mathematicians and philosophers have had a lot more to say about what
might be wrong with the students' reasoning---see
\href{http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.042/spring15/surprise-paradox.pdf}
     {\emph{The surprise examination or unexpected hanging paradox}}
     by Timothy Y. Chow, \cite{Chow98}.

\end{solution}

\end{problem}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Problem ends here
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\endinput



