Unique factorization domain
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  10/18/11

The quadratic integer ring $\integers[-5]$ of all complex numbers of
the form $a+b\sqrt{-5}$, where $a$ and $b$ are integers.  Then 6
factors as both $2\cdot 3$ and as $(1+ \sqrt{-5})(1- \sqrt{-5})$.
These truly are different factorizations, because the only units in
this ring are 1 and −1; thus, none of $2, 3, (1+ \sqrt{-5}), (1-
\sqrt{-5})$ and are associate.  It is not hard to show that all four
factors are irreducible as well, though this may not be obvious.  See
also algebraic integer.

Most factor rings of a polynomial ring are not UFDs.  Here are two
examples: Let R be any commutative ring.  Then R[X,Y,Z,W] / (XY − ZW)
is not a UFD.  The proof is in two parts.  First we must show X, Y, Z,
and W are all irreducible.  Grade R[X,Y,Z,W] / (XY − ZW) by degree.
Assume for a contradiction that X has a factorization into two
non-zero non-units.  Since it is degree one, the two factors must be a
degree one element αX + βY + γZ + δW and a degree zero element r.
This gives X = rαX + rβY + rγZ + rδW.  In R[X,Y,Z,W], then, the degree
one element (rα − 1)X + rβY + rγZ + rδW must be an element of the
ideal (XY − ZW), but the non-zero elements of that ideal are degree
two and higher.  Consequently, (rα − 1)X + rβY + rγZ + rδW must be
zero in R[X,Y,Z,W].  That implies that rα = 1, so r is a unit, which
is a contradiction.  Y, Z, and W are irreducible by the same argument.
Next, the element XY equals the element ZW because of the relation XY
− ZW = 0.  That means that XY and ZW are two different factorizations
of the same element into irreducibles, so R[X,Y,Z,W] / (XY − ZW) is
not a UFD.
